---
layout: default
title: "about the journal: publishing from your web browser"
---

This journal is being hosted on GitHub using GitHub Pages.

GitHub Pages is static hosting, but static hosting comes in many flavors.  
My options are:

* upload static files (HTML, CSS, JS, etc) directly
* use a static-site generator CMS

A **static-site generator CMS** lets me store content in **markdown** and templates in other formats, 
and then static files (HTML, CSS, JS, etc) are generated *only at the time of publishing*.  
Files still **cannot** be dynamically generated upon a *user's request*. 
This is what makes the CMS a **static-site generator**.

Options for static-site generators on GitHub Pages can further be broken down as follows:

* configure GitHub Actions for publishing using any static-site generator
* use the pre-configured static-site generator **Jekyll**

For this journal, I've chosen the second option, Jekyll.

The configuration of my own static-site generator on GitHub Actions is *not trival*.  
For anyone who may be setting up their very first website, or anyone who just wants a website *quickly* 
and for *minimal effort*, I **strongly** recommend using Jekyll.

The docs for Jekyll recommend that you install and run a copy of Jekyll locally on your machine.  
And though I have done this in the past and I agree it is preferrable, for this journal I have been publishing
*without a local Jekyll environment*.

This means two things:

* GitHub's website is my UI
  I don't use `git` to put files into my repo.
  If I want, I can edit a file locally and upload it, but I've been choosing to manage and edit files entirely
  from the web interface.
* I'm always pushing changes to "prod"
  There is effectively no test environment.  Every change is live, which means errors are public until I revert
  to a previous revision or fix the errors.
  This is worth mentioning because this will be a deal-breaker for some.

This is my first project managed in this way, so I'm doing it mostly for the experience.  
I believe that for some people, this method will be ideal.  Specifically, I think it will be ideal for someone who:

1. doesn't mind if the public website is sometimes broken or mangled or contains errors
2. wants to get a website up with the minimal amount of effort
3. wants to work from any device, including smartphones or tablets

At some point in subsequent post, I plan to explore the details of exactly how one accomplishes this.
