---
layout: default
title: "What happened here?"
---

In the past few weeks, there have been no new posts but as I write this, this repo currently has 150 commits.  *So what gives?*

Well there's two ways to answer this:

1. I've been fiddling around a [test page]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link inspect.md %}) for the purposes of:
   
   a. exploring the Jekyll objects available to Liquid templates
   b. serializing Liquid data to XML output
   
3. This is what it looks like what you develop on prod

Number **1** could be interesting enough to overlook **2**, but let's get real for a moment:

I started this project to document my dev work, but also to hack on Jekyll.

One particular angle of the Jekyll hacking was to try setting up a website **with no local instance** mainly to see 
just how far I can get before I hit a boundary.

So far I haven't hit boundaries, but I've now hit upon **2** really good arguments against working without a local instance.

I talked about the first reason in [the previous post]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link _posts/2023-10-23-001.md %}).
(spoiler: can't roll back to a previous commit using the GitHub website, it requires access to git)  
If I'm technical about it, this first reason doesn't *require* a **local instance of Jekyll**, it *requires* a **local copy of the repo**.

However, let's talk about the "second" reason to install a local instance of Jekyll:  the reason I committed **so many** changes
was to trigger the GitHub Actions workflow to render an updated copy of this website.  Or more simply, I refreshed the website
to test if my code worked.

And I really feel like I need to openly acknowledge that **this is a really asinine thing to do**.

Had I simply run a local copy of Jekyll I could have had a **far, far cleaner revision history** without all the countless 
failed attempts at changes.  But what's more, the GitHub Actions workflow is *slow*.  I could have had *far faster* results
with a local copy of Jekyll.

I don't really have a good excuse for why I did this.  Maybe impulsiveness?  I think it's inaccurate to call it "impatientce"
because I certainly needed patience for GitHub Actions.

Wherever it is the problem lies, I still haven't resolved it because I want to do some more hacking on this stuff but I'm reluctant
to set up a local instance -- even though I know it's what I *should* be doing for this kind of hacking.

I know that a local instance introduces a bunch of new complexity that I just don't want to think about right now.  
I *do* want to think about it *at some point*, because I'd like to package and distribute some resources that make it easy to
just get started quickly with a local instance.  But that's a whole 'nother can of worms and right now I just wanna hack a bit
in Jekyll without being bothered with that stuff today.

I mean, can you blame me?
