---
layout: default
title: "Opening ports on the Pinephone"
---

Awhile ago (too long ago for me to remember) I enabled the sshd server to allow incoming connections to my Pinephone.  
The operation was easy and mundane, so much so that I can't remember any of the details of how I did it.

When I tried to run a simple web server, I expected the same level of effortlessness, but sadly, this is not the case.

When I launch a webserver, I can only connect to it with:
* the same local machine (localhost)
* ssh forwarding to the local machine

So for example, I can use the Pinephone's GUI to open Chromium and load a page or I can load a page using `curl`,  
and using the ssh client on my Chromebook I can forward the local port (say, `8080`) and then open `http://localhost:8080` using my Chromebook.
But if I try `http://192.168.xxx.yyy:8080` on the Chromebook, it fails.

I suspected `iptables` was the problem so I opened it up and it was empty, not even anything for ssh.  
I added rules for both port 22 (ssh) and port 8080, but it had no effect.

I tried using `socat` to create a super simple http server on port 8080, and I got the same result.  
So I no longer suspect my server is to blame (which I only kinda-sorta suspected, considering it works locally).

I looked into how to start the sshd server, to refresh my memory, and it requires **[Open RC](https://wiki.alpinelinux.org/wiki/OpenRC)**, 
an init system in Alpine Linux.  I strongly suspect that I will need to make use of this if I want to open ports.

A long time ago, I got introduced to a pretty simple web server called `[lws](https://github.com/lwsjs/lws)` that runs on node.js.  
From what I've seen, it looks like it can be used as a really simple alternative to **nginx** as a *reverse proxy server*.

The thing is that I want to open up ports from time to time without having to fuck around in **Open RC** each time.  
I also sorta hate keeping track of which ports I'm using for what, and I have from time-to-time day dreamed about using routes  
(or URLs) for various services, as opposed to unique ports for each unique service/server.

This is an opportunity to kill two birds with one stone:  
I set up `lws` in **OpenRC**, then each time I run a service I give it a route in `lws`.

This is going to require me to do a few things:

So when I run service *foo* on port 8080, I tell `lws` to route requests for `/foo` to `http://localhost:8080`.

* [ ] install `lws`
* [ ] learn and experiment with reverse proxying
* [ ] learn to add it as a service in **OpenRC**

