---
layout: default
title: "simple bash automation: renaming files"
---

I have a fairly simple file renaming operation that I want to automate.  It's fairly simple, but just
complex enough that I want to jot it all down here to keep track of all the information so that
I can execute it without mistakes and perhaps to find an elegant approach without unnecessary complexity.

Ignoring edge cases, the files should be renamed in *multiples of 2*.

Renaming should go something like this:

| old name | new name |
| :-: | :-: |
| `foo`**A**`bar` | `fee`**X**`bu`**1**`biz` |
| `foo`**B**`bar` | `fee`**X**`bu`**2**`biz` |
| `foo`**C**`bar` | `fee`**Y**`bu`**1**`biz` |
| `foo`**D**`bar` | `fee`**Y**`bu`**2**`biz` |

So there are as many as **3** sequences to keep track of:
1. `A B C D`
2. `X Y`
3. `1 2`

Sequence **1** could be detected automatically (and maybe later it will), but to begin I want to supply
it *manually* as an argument to the script.  
Sequence **2** must be supplied manually as an argument.  
For now I want to hard-code sequence **3** into the script.  Later, I will add functionality for other values.

Ideally, I would like to pass sequence 1 as argument one (`$1`) and sequence 2 as argument two (`$2`)

If double-quoted and written in full, this isn't a problem.  In fact, even some globbing is recognized by the script.  
However where I hit trouble is if I try to do more tricky patterns such as `foo{X..Y}`.  So far in my tests,
this wasn't expanded (so the literal text input was printed).  I need to explore how to expand value of this syntax.

Let's return to that later.

First, let's just assume the input works so then next look at the logic for using the sequences.

Potentially I want to loop sequence 3 **inside** sequence 2.  This makes sense if you look at the table above:  
X1, X2, Y1, Y2

I **do not** want to loop any sequences inside sequence 1.  Looping another sequence inside sequence 1 increases 
(multiplies) the number of items.   We don't want to create additional files, we simply want to rename them.

Therefore, there must be a relationship between *sequence 1* and *sequences 2 and 3*, but it can't be nested inside.

I'm looking at using **arrays** and making use of array indexes for the relationship between sequences.

When sequence **3** always remains `1 2`, then sequence **1** has *twice as many* items as sequence **2**.

Looping sequence **3** *inside* sequence **2** yields an amount of output values *equal to* the amount of values
in sequence **1**.

Here's one pseudo-algorithm for how to map the values:
1. make an array of sequence 1, length N
2. make an array of sequence 2, length N/2
3. loop over sequences 2 and 3 (3 nested in 2) and calculate array index values for sequence 1

I've done something like this in the past and it *works*, but it demands that the rules don't change.  
As soon as the rules change, all the logic must be changed.   Since I already know that there will be edge cases,
I know I'd have to entirely re-write all of this later.   It makes more sense to re-write it now with a different 
algorithm that is easier to modify later.

So here's an alternative pseudo-algorithm:
1. make an array of sequence 1, length N  *(same as before)*
2. make another new array of length N
3. loop over sequences 2 and 3 (3 nested in 2) and **insert values** into new array
4. loop over sequence 1 and map between the two arrays using the same index

Is this better? And if so, why?

The big difference that I can see is that potentially very little has to change about the second pseudo-algorithm
if we have a sequence 1 that **doesn't** have a length with a *multiple of 2*.  Only step 3 needs to be modified,
the other steps are fine.

Arrays in bash are still new to me, so I need to study the docs and perform some tests to get this right.

My goals will be as follows:

* create a script that takes 2 arguments
  * `$1` is a sequence of original file names
  * `$2` is a sequence of new names
* create an array from `$1` as automatically as possible
* create an array and load in values from nested loops
  * outer loop: `$2`
  * inner loop: `1 2`
* using one final loop, map between arrays
