---
layout: default
title: "renaming files in bash: from concept to code"
---

After the previous post, I wrote a bash script that 
could perform the desired function.  It works now, but
not everything went smoothly.  Here, I'll introduce
the script and describe where I had trouble.

## Code Review

Let's revisit my "requirements" from the last post:

### First
> * create a script that takes 2 arguments
>   * `$1` is a sequence of original file names
>   * `$2` is a sequence of new names

In bash, this doesn't need to be defined or configured
in code.  There isn't any kind of input validation 
happening here.  If my code can't understand the input,
then it breaks.

However, I did include this comment in the script
so that anyone curious enough to look at the source
can see what I have intended for the input to be.

```bash
## two arguments
# 1 - list of vid files
# 2 - list of lesson numbers to use in new names
```

**but wait**... I included some additional feature
that I mentioned earlier in the post.  I described
how *brace expansion* ( `foo{1..3}` ) was not working
when I passed in the argument in quotes.

Earlier my workaround was simply to not use brace
expansion.  However I solved the problem so that
now **I can** use brace expansion.

```bash
# perform brace expansion of lesson number list
listLesNum=$(eval echo $2)
```

### Next
> * create an array from `$1` as automatically as possible

Here's what worked:
```bash
# parse list of vid files into an array
declare -a arrFiles
arrFiles+=( $1 )
```

...and here's what **didn't work**:
```bash
# DIDN'T WORK
read -a arrFiles <<< $1
```

It didn't fail completely and catastrophically.
Instead, it just failed to perform "breaks" at the
whitespace.  The result was 1 array element instead
of many, and that 1 element contained spaces.

I should point out that this was really difficult
to spot at first!

For starters, I didn't throw any error because it
successfully read in data and made an non-empty array.
Furthermore, if I attempted to display the contents
of the array I saw all the data that I expected.

```bash
# print contents of array
echo ${arrFiles[@]}
# output looks ok
```

I finally figured out what happened when I printed
**the length of the array** and the result was **1**.

```bash
# print length of array
echo ${#arrFiles[@]}
# output: 1
```

Though I don't *fully* understand why one syntax worked
and the other didn't, I have a loose understanding 
of the situation.

Bash has many *operations* to perform and it does
these in a sequence, not so much unlike arithmetic
*order of operations*.  Somehow the operation that
splits input based on **$IFS** (the **I**nput 
**F**ield **S**eparator ) wasn't happening when I used
the `read` command and the *herestring* `<<<` syntax.

I don't understand "why" on any deeper level than
this.  Sometimes the answer is "just because" so 
I guess I'm satisfied enough because I found a
solution.  And rather than attempt to understand
further, I'm content to document the discovery
for posterity and maybe at a later date this will
be helpful.

### Next
> * create an array and load in values from nested loops
>   * outer loop: `$2`
>   * inner loop: `1 2`

Here's what worked:

```bash
# make another array for output (new names)
declare -a arrNew
for les in $listLesNum; do
	for part in 1 2; do
		arrNew+=( $(printf "lesson-%d__video__part-%d.mp4" $les $part) )
	done
done
```

The value `$2` doesnt appear anywhere in this code
because of the additional code I introduced earlier
for processing *brace expansion*.  Therefore,
this loop uses `$listLesNum`, a string that was
created from `$2`.

### Finally
> * using one final loop, map between arrays

Here is the code:

```bash
# output table of values from both arrays
for (( i=0; i<${#arrFiles[@]}; i++ )); do
	printf "%s\t%s\n" ${arrFiles[$i]} ${arrNew[$i]}
done
```

I don't often use `for` loops with this syntax,
so when my `read` statement was loading just one
big string into the array and I had to debug,
I assumed my `for` loop syntax was broken somehow
so I wasted a lot of time trying to fix it when
it wasn't actually broken.  **Oops**

## Putting it to use

Intially, I made this script output very simple
tab-separated columns just so I could see that
it was working.  However, this output format fit
**really nicely** into a larger workflow without
requiring any changes.

Take a look at this:

```bash
bash ~/foo/bar/rename-vids.sh "MAH*MP4" "89{8..9}" \
| xargs -L 1 -p mv
```

I only had to pipe the output into a *very* simple
`xargs` command. The `-p` argument allowed me to 
check each move before it happened.  Considering the
script is new, this is a really nice way to oversee
that nothing gets messed up too badly.

See [ExplainShell.com 's breakdown](https://explainshell.com/explain?cmd=bash+%7E%2Ffoo%2Fbar%2Frename-vids.sh+%22MAH*MP4%22+%2289%7B8..9%7D%22+%7C+xargs+-L+1+-p+mv)
for more details about these commands.
