---
layout: default
title: "how to publish from the browser: first steps"
---

Previously I gave an overview of how this journal works, but now I seek to give enough details for 
anyone who might want to try it for themselves.

I want to point out that much documentation for GitHub Pages have been produced, so I won't attempt
to explain every last detail.   I simply aim to append some additional details to the existing docs
so that you can make adjustments to your deploy.   So find the official docs before you get started.

If you just start uploading files to your repo, they won't automatically be put on the web.  
You need to go into the settings of your repo and turn on Pages.

At the time of this writing, there is a portion of these settings called **Publishing Source**
and you should choose to *publish from a branch*.  The alternative is a *GitHub Actions Workflow*.  
That's the hard way, we don't want it.

https://docs.github.com/en/pages/getting-started-with-github-pages/configuring-a-publishing-source-for-your-github-pages-site

The rest of the options shouldn't really matter, so ahead and customize it as you see fit.

When you're done, what you should have is a pre-made GitHub action that will publish any static HTML, CSS, JS, etc.
that you upload.   You can try this out if you want:  upload an HTML file, or create a new file and
call it `anything-you-want.html` and commit it.  After you commit it, there will a *Deployment* that 
may take a minute or two, after which you can see your static page online.

But that's not what I said to expect, right?  I talked about writing markdown, not html.  
So, if you create an `anything.md` markdown file in exactly the same way as `anything-you-want.html`,
it will just work?  Right?

Try it for yourself.  It doesn't work.  The md file is published, but not as HTML.  It is visible as plain text only.
Something is still missing.

We need to go to the root of your website (the directory where you told GitHub to look for the root of the website) 
and create a new file called `_config.yml`.  What do you put in this file?  That's the neat part: you don't.
The file can be completely empty and it still functions to enable processing of markdown.

If you've created `anything.md`, then after creating `_config.yml` let the deployment finish and 
try looking at `anything.md` once again.  Now it should be an HTML file.

Is that it?  Is that everything?  Well, it's the minimum you need to get started.

To keep going, I'd recommend looking at the docs for Jekyll and learning about how Jekyll works.

You're probably going to want to start putting things in that config file, such as the `baseurl` option so that 
Jekyll can make it slightly easier for you to not mangle URLs on your site.

If you plan to make something resembling a blog, then you'll want to create a directory called `_posts`
and deposit your posts here.  (Be sure to see the Jekyll docs to learn about posts, especially 
how you should name files)

If you aren't in love with the stock appearance, you can either select from a few themes provided by GitHub,
or you can import a remote theme using `remote_theme` in your `_config.yml` file.  Otherwise, you can start
studying how layouts work in Jekyll and make your own.  

I prefer to make my own layouts, but I admit it's slow.  So to just publish quickly, I'd probably just
use the default appearance.  I would recommend studying layouts in the Jekyll docs so that you know how 
to customize or extend existing layouts if you want.  I find it super useful.

In my opinion, Jekyll can be really useful but it takes time to learn.  
And I said from the start, this is about getting something online quickly.

It's really ok to take a minimal approach and study new features only as quickly as you need them.

Without posts or layouts, you can create what Jekyll calls *pages*.  Your md will be converted into html  
and the filename will get a `.html` extension instead of `.md`.   Directory structures are maintained.

It's super simple and may be just what you need.
