---
layout: default
title: "Pinephone automation: overview"
---

I'm using a Linux based smartphone called the **Pinephone** as a part of my workflow when I produce videos.

At present, the primary function of the Pinephone is to provide slides during the filming, like a teleprompter.

Other functions may be added in the future, but lately there is one specific function I'm working to add.
I want to attach a microSD card via USB and have the Pinephone upload the video files to my server.

In this journal post I want to explore in detail how I (as a user) expect the Pinephone to behave so that I
(as a developer) have an outline of requirements to meet.

Let's do this using the concept of [**user stories**](https://www.atlassian.com/agile/project-management/user-stories).

* As a **busy person**, I want to **attach the microSD to my Pinephone and let the software work with
as little interaction as necessary** so that **I can leave the studio before the upload is completed**.
* As a **security-conscious person**, I want to **require that operations happen over an ssh connection** so that
**I don't have to try to secure my home file server against any and all attackers on the Internet**.

This may cover everything from a purely **qualitative** standpoint.  To discuss it further requires we get technical.

* I don't have access to the studio's firewall, so it's not enough for me to simply configure port-forwarding
  and have an open port on the Pinephone listening for incoming connections.
  For this reason, it's necessary that the connection be **outbound** to my server from the Pinephone.
* I plan to adjust the ssh configuration as much as possible to resist disconnection, but **I must** have
  a plan for how the Pinephone will re-establish a connection if it is dropped.
  In addition to re-establishing the ssh connection, the software should also resume the file transfer task.
* File transfers should attempt to be smart in the following ways:
  * transfer only the files I need
  * use checksums to verify that the transfer was completed without errors
* While not strictly necessary in the first version of this solution, I would like to automate renaming of files

It might be a good idea to now explore what steps I have already completed and what things I've already 
identified as things I haven't yet completed.

- [x] configured ssh for login to my homeserver using an **identity file**  
      The result is that I don't need to supply a password when connecting, so I can automate an ssh connection.
- [x] experimented with a bash script that accomplishes the following:
  * opens ssh connection to my home server
  * establishes listening port XXX on my home server, forwarded back to my Pinephone's ssh server
  * establishes listening port YYY on my Pinephone, forwarded to port ZZZ on my home server
  * starts up file server on my home server listening on port ZZZ (not visible outside my home network's firewall) 
- [x] set up a mount point until my home directory on the Pinephone where the microSD card is mounted (requires `sudo`
     to mount )
- [ ] configure Pinephone for automatic mounting of microSD card (may require additional software to be installed)
- [ ] test auto mounting, particularly two situations:
  * hotplug microSD while Pinephone is running
  * reboot Pinephone while microSD is attached
- [ ] adjust ssh configuration to resist disconnection
- [ ] some solution for detecting a disconnect and reconnecting
- [ ] test ssh reconnections
- [ ] configure rclone client on Pinephone for SFTP connection to home server
- [ ] test rclone client SFTP connection

Lately I have been exploring options relating to the auto-mounting challenge.  I am trying to find a solution
that isn't a monster-size platform.  I want a simple, minimal solution.  If I can find something, I'd like to start
experimenting with it soon.
