---
layout: default
title: "Android backups: introduction"
---

# Making a backup of the phone

It's that time again, copying files from my Android phone to my Linux machine.

Because it's not my first rodeo, let's review the basic elements before putting them all together.

## `adb`

This Linux command is intended for debugging an Android phone, so before this utility can be used it is necessary
to set the phone to allow debugging mode.  I'll leave this as an exercise for the reader to search online for
instructions to enable debugging mode.

Apparently it is possible to connect wirelessly, but to keep things simpler I opt to connect with USB.

Sometimes my phone connects automatically, sometimes it doesn't.  When it doesn't, it may be because the adb server isn't started.

A simple operation to make sure the server is running (and if it's not, start it) is `adb devices`.

## `adb shell`

This command is a lot like `bash` or `sh` or `ssh`.  When given a command, it will run the commmand and after printing the output
it brings the user back the prompt of their original terminal.  With no command, we get a new terminal prompt.   

In this case, this prompt is for the Android phone.  All commands are run on the phone.

Here are some of the most important:

### `toybox`

`toybox` is an alternative to `busybox`.  It's purpose is to provide a whole bunch of useful unix utils.

Here's what I get when I run `busybox` on my phone:

```Shell
$ adb shell toybox
acpi base64 basename blkid blockdev cal cat chattr chcon chgrp chmod
chown chroot chrt cksum clear cmp comm cp cpio cut date dd devmem
df diff dirname dmesg dos2unix du echo egrep env expand expr fallocate
false fgrep file find flock fmt free freeramdisk fsfreeze fsync getconf
getenforce getfattr getopt grep groups gunzip gzip head help hostname
hwclock i2cdetect i2cdump i2cget i2cset iconv id ifconfig inotifyd
insmod install ionice iorenice iotop kill killall ln load_policy log
logname losetup ls lsattr lsmod lsof lspci lsusb makedevs md5sum microcom
mkdir mkfifo mknod mkswap mktemp modinfo modprobe more mount mountpoint
mv nbd-client nc netcat netstat nice nl nohup nproc nsenter od partprobe
paste patch pgrep pidof ping ping6 pivot_root pkill pmap printenv
printf prlimit ps pwd pwdx readelf readlink realpath renice restorecon
rev rfkill rm rmdir rmmod runcon sed sendevent seq setenforce setfattr
setsid sha1sum sha224sum sha256sum sha384sum sha512sum sleep sort
split stat strings stty swapoff swapon sync sysctl tac tail tar taskset
tee test time timeout top touch tr traceroute traceroute6 true truncate
tty tunctl ulimit umount uname uniq unix2dos unlink unshare uptime
usleep uudecode uuencode uuidgen vconfig vi vmstat watch wc which
whoami xargs xxd yes zcat
```

### `find` 

I just took a look at `find --help` and it seems this version has way more features than my PinePhone (running Linux).
Apparently I need to put ToyBox on the PinePhone.

### `cksum`

This is going to be vital for checking that files are copied faithfully.

### `basename` and `dirname`

When combined with output from `find` this can make it easier to work with file paths.   
(However the `-printf` argument of `find` may be enough so that these utilities aren't necessary)

### `rm`

If the goal is to **copy** files from the phone, this won't be necessary.  
If the goal is to **move** files from the phone, this **will** be necessary.

## `adb pull`

Unlike the shell commands listed above, `adb pull` runs on the Linux machine.  It only *copies* files, it doesn't *move* files.  
So if moving is desired, it is a 2-step process:
 * copy to Linux machine
 * delete from phone

# Next steps

I will introduce another step into the 2-step move process described above:
 * copy to Linux machine
 * **verify checksum of both files**
 * delete from phone

Additionally, I need to introduce some logic to deal with these realities:
 * copy operations take a lot of time
 * operations may need to be interrupted before completion
 * operations may fail or may appear successful but the copy is corrupt

So I will need the following:
 * an option to shutdown a copy operation as safely as possible if the phone must be disconnected
 * scans of source and destination to build a list of files
   * identify files as *missing from dest*, *in both but mismatch*, *in both and matching*
 * run `cksum` on Android and on Linux to verify if copy was successful

 
