---
title: "dev blogging"
---

I think it's really time for me to organize my thoughts about using GitHub and GitHub Pages 
for the purpose of moving from thoughts to actions.

I'll make an attempt here to purge all the ideas I've been kicking around and organize these ideas as much as I can.

## publishing

One of the core ideas is that developers should publish what they're doing.

The classic model of GitHub is to share code, data, resources, etc. in the form of repos.

This model isn't *broken* and I'm not seeking to make it obsolete, but I am seeking to *expand*.

So the simplest way to expand is with a journal or blog.  This implies text.  
Beyond that, someone can publish other forms of multimeda, such as:
 * audio
 * video
 * embedded multimedia

### publishing resources

It's only natural to share resources that can be used for publishing, such as templates.

## community and networking

After technical hurdles of publishing, the big hurdles that remain are:
 * deciding on content to produce
 * finding an audience

To address the second point, I'm in favor of the strategy of building a network of people who are
both users and producers.  There are various ways that a network like this can boost each other.

 * **comments** (if one is inclined to turn on comments on their posts)
 * **posts that mention and discuss** another producer's content
 * **aggregate sites** that display content from many producers in a single feed

## conclusion

So these are the core objectives as I can see them.  
The next thing to do is identify what resources would make it possible to accomplish these objectives.
