---
layout: default
title: "Refactoring and updating the script for English lessons"
---

I'm going to review some of my scripts that I use to make English lessons and review what they do, looking for opportunities to make updates.

## `new_ryu.sh`

I run this to **create** new lessons, and also to **regenerate** some html files.

Several files are used by this script:
* `output-lesson-data.sh`
* `simple-*.xml`
* `template.md`
* `template.html`
* `slides/747/index.html`

### `output-lesson-data.sh`

This script takes several XML files, transforms them into text, and concatenates them into one big output file.  The format of the output text is TSV.
It also "cleans" up some text from the source.

This script uses these files:
* `transform-simple2tsv.xsl`

## `refresh-index.sh`

I run this script to refresh an index of all the lessons.
The index is in XML, and an external stylesheet transforms the list into an HTML list when it is hosted on a web server.

This script uses these files:
* `index.xsl`

## `consolemd.sh`

I use this script to review the `lesson.md` file in the console, not as literal markdown but as simplified html.
For purposes such as determining which parts of the template are filled in, this is easier to look at than markdown source.

## `export-slides.sh`

I use this script to generate simplified html, then convert it to a PDF file.   The previous script is for viewing in the console, this script is for generating a PDF file.   Both scripts use the same simple HTML format.

## `rename-vids.sh`

I currently use this script to rename video files after they have been copied from my SD card to my HDD.

## `vid_files.sh`

This script is not yet working, it is a work in progress.
The purpose is do many tasks related to the video files:

* [ ] print out a list of creation dates of video files
* [ ] prompt user to select a window of time (to select files)
* [ ] if necessary, create directory for video files
* [ ] copy video files
* [ ] rename video files
* [ ] generate PDFs of lessons
* [ ] copy PDF files

Of these tasks, two of these are currently carried out by other scripts:  `rename-vids.sh` and `export-slides.sh`
